# Exercise 2 

In the first exercise, we solved a simple "steady-state" problem (i.e. there was no time derivative) in the problem. We will know look at one of the simplest transient problems that you should be familiar with from `Heat and Mass Transfer 1`. 

This exercise is broken into two parts as we want to explore different aspects of the same equation system. In the first part, we focus more on how transient problems are tackled and we consider the case where Dirichlet boundary conditions are applied. In the second part, we approach the problem more from a transport perspective and how a reaction in the system can be modelled. 

## Part 1

The equation system of for the transient problem can be written as follows: 
$$
\frac{\partial x}{\partial t} = D \nabla ^{2}x,
$$
where $x$ is the mole fraction, $t$ is the time and $D$ is the diffusion coefficient. The treatment of the diffusion term is not too dissimilar from the previous exercise, but we need to think about how we handle the time derivative. 

For this exercise, we will consider two simple ways of handling the time derivative:

1. Fully explicit forward Euler time-stepping 
2. Fully implicit backward Euler time-stepping

This part may get a bit technical, so I will attempt to flesh out every step and keep it as simple as possible. We are able to write an approximation for the full equation as follows for $x$ at a point $i$ as follows:
$$
\frac{x_{i}^{new} - x_{i}^{old}}{\Delta t} = \alpha D \frac{x^{new}_{i+1}- 2x^{new}_{i} + x^{new}_{i-1}}{\Delta x^{2}} + (1-\alpha) D \frac{x^{old}_{i+1}- 2x^{old}_{i} + x^{old}_{i-1}}{\Delta x^{2}}
$$
We introduce a new parameter $\alpha$ which readily enables us to pick a specific numerical scheme. The three values of $\alpha$ that are of particular interest are (We are only considering the first 2): 

1. $\alpha = 1$: Fully implicit backward Euler time-stepping. 
2. $\alpha=0$: Fully explicit forward Euler time-stepping
3. $\alpha = 0.5$: Crank-Nicolson time-stepping. 

When $\alpha = 1$: 
$$
\frac{x_{i}^{new} - x_{i}^{old}}{\Delta t} =  D \frac{x^{new}_{i+1}- 2x^{new}_{i} + x^{new}_{i-1}}{\Delta x^{2}}
$$
When $\alpha = 0$: 
$$
\frac{x_{i}^{new} - x_{i}^{old}}{\Delta t} =  D \frac{x^{old}_{i+1}- 2x^{old}_{i} + x^{old}_{i-1}}{\Delta x^{2}}
$$
When a fully explicit scheme such as the forward Euler is used, the new value (moving forward in time) can be evaluated explicitly from values from the old values from the previous timestep which makes it much more easy to implement than implicit methods. However, the trade off is that often, explicit time stepping requires excessively small timesteps for numerical stability while the implicit backwards Euler time-stepping is far more stable. 

For diffusion problems (We can treat heat and mass transfer as diffusion problems collectively), we can consider the following metric: 

We can write down the dimensionless mesh Fourier number $Fo_{Mesh}$: 
$$
Fo_{Mesh} = D \frac{\Delta t}{\Delta x ^{2}}
$$
For fullness, a not entirely rigorous derivation of the stability criteria for the explicit Forward Euler method is presented. Feel free to gloss over this section. 

So we start with the discretization scheme of the explicit forward Euler: 
$$
\frac{x_{i}^{new} - x_{i}^{old}}{\Delta t} =  D \frac{x^{old}_{i+1}- 2x^{old}_{i} + x^{old}_{i-1}}{\Delta x^{2}}
$$
Rejigging things: 
$$
x_{i}^{new} = x_{i}^{old} + D\frac{\Delta t}{\Delta x^{2}} \bigg( x^{old}_{i+1}- 2x^{old}_{i} + x^{old}_{i-1} \bigg)
$$
Introducing $Fo_{Mesh}$:
$$
x_{i}^{new} = x_{i}^{old} + Fo_{Mesh} \bigg( x^{old}_{i+1}- 2x^{old}_{i} + x^{old}_{i-1} \bigg)
$$
We can further rejig this to group all the $x_{i}^{old}$ terms together:
$$
x_{i}^{new} = (1- 2 Fo_{Mesh}) x_{i}^{old} + 2Fo_{Mesh} \bigg( \frac{x^{old}_{i+1} + x^{old}_{i-1} } {2} \bigg)
$$
The insight to be gained from rejigging the equation to the above form is that $x_{i}^{new}$ is the weighted average of the old value $x$ at that point $i$ and the average of the neighboring points' $i+1$  and $i-1$ old value of $x$. If $Fo_{Mesh} = 0$, then its easy to see that we are not advancing forward in time. When $Fo_{Mesh} = 0.5$:

 