# Exercise 3

Thus far, we have solved equations that are comparatively simple. We now attempt to solve a more complicated problem of interest namely the Convection-Diffusion-Reaction (CDR) equation. This exercise is broken up into 2 parts. The first part demonstrates the difference between convective and diffusive transport. The second part outlines how reactions can be modelled. In particular, we explore coupling the transport equations for multiple species. 



## Part 1

### Problem statement

The model equation is written as follows: 
$$
\frac{\partial c}{\partial t} + u_{x}\frac{\partial c}{\partial x}= D \frac{\partial ^{2}c}{\partial x^{2}} 
$$
where $D$ is the diffusion coefficient and $u_{x}$ is the velocity. $c$ is the mole fraction and is by definition, non-dimensional. Typically, the equations are scaled and solved in non-dimensional form which enables us to work in dimensionless groups instead. However, some solvers do not accommodate this  so readily e.g. `OpenFOAM`. 

We introduce the following scalings: 
$$
x = L \tilde{x}
$$

$$
u_{x} = U \tilde{u}_{x}
$$

$$
t = \frac{L}{U} \tilde{t}
$$

The model equation then becomes: 
$$
\frac{U}{L} \frac{\partial c}{\partial \tilde {t}} + \frac{U}{L} \tilde{u}_{x} \frac{\partial c}{\partial \tilde{x}} = \frac{D}{L^{2}} \frac{\partial ^{2}c}{\partial \tilde{x}^{2}} 
$$

After a bit of cleanup: 
$$
\frac{\partial c}{\partial \tilde {t}} + \tilde{u}_{x}\frac{\partial c}{\partial \tilde{x}} = \frac{1}{\mathrm{Pe}} \frac{\partial ^{2}c}{\partial \tilde{x}^{2}} 
$$
Where $\mathrm{Pe} = \frac{UL}{D}$ is the Peclet number and tracks the ratio of convective transport to diffusive transport. We will often see the $\mathrm{Pe}$ come up in transport related problems. As you may have realised by now, we have two unknowns to solve for in this problem: $u_{x}$ and $c$, but have only supplied one equation thus far. If we were do do a full modelling of the problem, we would typically couple the above transport equation with the Navier-Stokes equations or their approximations (Stokes equation for example). 

The solution to this is to specify the value of $u_{x}$. Since we have abstracted its magnitude to the Peclet number $\mathrm{Pe}$, we shall specify it as $u_{x} = 1.0$. 

We now need to address the problems of the initial and boundary conditions. For this problem, we can introduce periodic boundary conditions or "Mario" boundary conditions. These boundary conditions have the effect of connecting one end of the simulation domain to the other end so as the particles are transported out of one end, they re-appear at the other end. Fortunately, `FiPy` makes it easy for us to set-up a domain with periodic boundary conditions. Mathematically, the these periodic boundary conditions can be written as:
$$
c(x=0, t) = c(x=L, t) 
$$
In non-dimensional form: 
$$
c(\tilde{x} = 0, \tilde{t}) = c(\tilde{x} = 1 , \tilde{t})
$$
For the initial boundary conditions, we specify a narrow gaussian distribution at the center of the domain: 
$$
c(\tilde{x}, \tilde{t}=0) = \frac{1}{0.05L \sqrt{2 \pi}} e^{\frac{-1}{2} \bigg( {\frac{\tilde{x} - 0.5}{0.05L}} \bigg)^{2}}
$$

### Numerical implementation

#### Theoretical discussion

Let us explore things from a more theoretical level. We introduce two specific dimensionless groups: the Courant $\mathrm{Co}$ and grid Peclet $\mathrm{Pe}_{Cell}$ numbers: 
$$
\mathrm{Co} = \frac{U \Delta t}{\Delta x}
$$

$$
\mathrm{Pe}_{Cell} = \frac{U \Delta x}{D}
$$

Suppose we keep $D = 1.0$ as per the previous diffusion problems and we specify $\mathrm{Pe} = 100$, in terms of dimensionless variables ($L = 1.0$). From a stability perspective, it has been presented in the literature that $\mathrm{Pe}_{Cell} < 2.0$ is necessary. We shall keep $\mathrm{Pe}_{Cell} = 1.0$ which corresponds to $\Delta x = 0.01$.  

To make sense of the Courant number, let us perform a similar discretization as we did for the diffusion problem to derive the Fourier number. We consider the pure advective equation: 
$$
\frac{\partial c}{\partial t} + u_{x}\frac{\partial x}{\partial x} = 0
$$
Before progressing, let us revisit some basic concepts: 

A derivative is written as follows: 
$$
\frac{d}{dx}c(x_{0}) = \lim_{\Delta x \to 0} \frac{c(x_{0} + \Delta x) - c(x_{0})}{\Delta x}
$$
We can also write the Taylor series expansion for $c$: 
$$
c(x_{0} + \Delta x) = c(x_{0}) + \Delta x \frac{\partial c}{\partial x}\bigg|_{x_{0}} + \frac{\Delta x^{2}}{2} \frac{\partial^{2} c}{\partial x^{2}}\bigg|_{x_{0}} + \frac{\Delta x^{3}}{6} \frac{\partial^{3} c}{\partial x^{3}}\bigg|_{x_{0}} + \dots
$$
We can now evaluate the approximation order of the derivative: 
$$
\bigg( \frac{\partial c}{\partial x}\bigg|_{x_{{0}}} \bigg)_{DISCRETE} - \bigg( \frac{\partial c}{\partial x} \bigg|_{x_{0}} \bigg)_{EXACT} = \frac{\Delta x^{}}{2} \frac{\partial^{2} c}{\partial x^{2}}\bigg|_{x_{0}} + \frac{\Delta x^{2}}{6} \frac{\partial^{3} c}{\partial x^{3}}\bigg|_{x_{0}} + \dots
$$

$$
\frac{c(x_{0} + \Delta x) - c(x_{0})}{\Delta x} - \frac{\partial c}{\partial x} \bigg|_{x_{0}} = \frac{\Delta x^{}}{2} \frac{\partial^{2} c}{\partial x^{2}}\bigg|_{x_{0}} + \frac{\Delta x^{2}}{6} \frac{\partial^{3} c}{\partial x^{3}}\bigg|_{x_{0}} + \dots
$$

Note that the approximate form of the derivative looks like the simple discretization schemes we have used previously and will use subsequently. As shown in the RHS of the equation, the truncation error is of order $\Delta x$ which is first order. Hence the Euler time-stepping and first order upwind schemes are called first order. The error of the approximations scales with with $\mathcal{O} (\Delta x)$. It is possible to conceive of different schemes that are higher order, but that is significantly beyond the scope of this course. 

Going back to our original problem, we apply an explicit forward Euler discretization scheme and a simple first order upwind scheme for the advective term:
$$
\frac{c^{new}_{i} - c^{old}_{i}}{\Delta t} + u_{x} \frac{c^{old}_{i} - c_{i-1}^{old}}{\Delta x} = 0
$$
This can be written as follows: 
$$
\frac{c(x_{0}, t_{0}+ \Delta t) - c(x_{0}, t_{0})}{\Delta t} + u_{x} \frac{c(x_{0}, t_{0}) - c(x_{0} - \Delta x, t_{0})}{\Delta x} = 0
$$
To evaluate the error, we employ the same approach as with the derivatives. 
$$
\bigg( \frac{c(x_{0}, t_{0}+ \Delta t) - c(x_{0}, t_{0})}{\Delta t} + u_{x} \frac{c(x_{0}, t_{0}) - c(x_{0} - \Delta x, t_{0})}{\Delta x} \bigg) \\
 - \bigg( \frac{\partial c}{\partial t} \bigg|_{(x_{0}, t_{0})} + u_{x}\frac{\partial x}{\partial x} \bigg|_{(x_{0}, t_{0})} \bigg) \\
 = \frac{\Delta t}{2 } \frac{\partial^{2} c}{\partial t^{2}}\bigg|_{(x_{0}, t_{0})} - \frac{\Delta t}{2 } \frac{\partial^{2} c}{\partial t^{2}}\bigg|_{(x_{0}, t_{0})}
$$
