# Exercise 1

## Introduction

This is the first of four exercises to introduce how declarative PDE solvers in python can be easily used to solve PDEs of interest. To get things started, we will work through one of the examples from the problem sheets and present both the theoretical and numerical solution. 

## Learning objectives

After completing this first exercise, you should be able to do the following: 

1. Set up a simple case within `FiPy` 
2. Understand what a mesh is in the context of numerical methods
3. Understand the different methods of benchmarking and validating a model and simulation
4. Perform basic visualisation of simulation results using the visualisation tools built into `FiPy` 
5. Generate high quality plots for use in a report 



## Why bother with simulations

The `Math II` course you would be working on now (or possibly have completed) would have introduced a range of important advanced mathematical concepts that are used to study problems of interest to engineers.  However, as the emphasis of the course is to convey the mathematical principles in the clearest manner possible, many gory details are often omitted and most of the problems you would have encountered can be solved analytically. 

However, moving forward, the complexities arising from real-world problems such as coupled and nonlinear equations or complex geometries make pursuing numerical solutions the only viable way forward (Date, 2005). You might have had previous exposure to solving ODEs in `MATLAB` during other courses and many of the concepts are highly relevant to solving PDEs. `MATLAB` can also be used to solve PDEs and you should certainly explore it if you are interested and possibly more comfortable with the `MATLAB` environment. 

I personally advocate for using python environments and open-source solvers for the following reasons: 

- Python and the libraries used are open-source which means you will have access to them at anytime even after you graduate as opposed to `MATLAB` 
- Being open-source, you have more access to what is under the hood, but documentation may be scarcer and obtaining support more difficult. It is a double edged sword. 
- Familiarity and proficiency in python opens up many opportunities to learn and use other libraries such as data analytics and machine learning packages which are immensely useful and powerful

## Problem statement

We use the Q3 of problem sheet B2-3 as the model problem here. This equation represents the Laplace equation in $2D$ along the domain $(x,y) \in [(0,0), (a,b)]$ :
$$
\nabla ^{2} \phi =0 
$$
Subject to the following Dirichlet boundary conditions: 
$$
\phi (0,y) = \phi(a,y) = \phi(x,0) = 0, 
\\
\phi (x,b) = 1
$$

### Analytical solution

Analytically, we can solve this problem using the separation of variables:

Suppose that the solution to the equation $\phi(x,y) takes on the following form: 
$$
\phi(x,y) = X(x)Y(y)
$$
We can recast the PDE as such: 
$$
\frac{d^{2} X}{d x^{2}} + \lambda X = 0 
\\
\frac{d^{2} Y}{d y^{2}} - \lambda Y = 0
$$
Solving the first ODE: 
$$
X(x) = c_{1} \cos(\lambda x) + c_{2}\sin(\lambda x), 
$$
where $c_{1}$ and $c_{2}$ are the constants of integration and $\lambda$ is separation constant which needs to be evaluated. We use the boundary conditions to evaluate the constants and the non-trivial values of $\lambda$  

Applying the appropriate BCs i.e. $X(0) = X(a) = 0$, we end up with: 
$$
X(x) = \sum_{n=0}^{\infin} c_{n} \sin(\frac{n \pi x}{a}),
$$
where $c_{n}$ is to be evaluated subsequently. As we are able to write an expression for $\lambda $ i.e. $\lambda = \frac{n \pi}{a}$ , we can consider the 2nd ODE: 
$$
\frac{d^{2}Y}{dy^{2}} - \frac{n \pi }{a} Y = 0
$$
Which gives us the general solution: 
$$
Y(y) = c_{4}\cosh\bigg(\frac{n \pi}{a} y \bigg) + c_{5}\sinh \bigg( \frac{n \pi }{a}y \bigg),
$$
where $c_{4}$ and $c_{5}$ are constants of integration. Applying the appropriate boundary condition i.e. $Y(0) = 0$:
$$
Y(y) = c_{5}\sinh \bigg( \frac{n \pi }{a}y \bigg)
$$
We therefore end up with the general solution for $\phi(x,y)$: 
$$
\phi(x,y) = \sum_{n=0}^{\infin} \bar{a}_{n} \sin \bigg( \frac{n \pi }{a}x \bigg)\sinh \bigg( \frac{n \pi }{a}y \bigg),
$$
where $\bar{a}_{n} = c_{5} \cdot c_{n}$ and needs to be evaluated by applying the final boundary condition. 

We can write $\phi(x,b)$ as follows: 
$$
\phi(x,b) = \sum_{n=0}^{\infin} \bar{a}_{n} \sinh \bigg( \frac{n \pi b}{a} \bigg) \sin \bigg( \frac{n \pi }{a}x \bigg)
$$
We are able to evaluate $\bar{a}_{n}$ as follows:
$$
\bar{a}_{n} \sinh \bigg( \frac{n \pi b}{a} \bigg) = \frac{2}{a} \int_{0}^{a}  \sin \bigg( \frac{n \pi }{a}x \bigg) dx
$$

$$
\bar{a}_{n} \sinh \bigg( \frac{n \pi b}{a} \bigg) = \frac{2}{n \pi}[1 -(-1)^{n}]
$$

For even values of $n$, $\bar{a}_{2n} = 0$ while for odd values of $n$:
$$
\bar{a}_{2n+1} = \frac{4}{(2n+1) \pi  \sinh \bigg( \frac{(2n+1) \pi b}{a} \bigg)}
$$
We are able to write the solution to our problem: 
$$
\phi(x,y) = \sum_{n=0}^{\infin} \frac{4}{(2n+1) \pi  \sinh \bigg( \frac{(2n+1) \pi b}{a} \bigg)} \bigg[ \sin \bigg( \frac{(2n+1) \pi }{a}x \bigg)\sinh \bigg( \frac{(2n+1) \pi }{a}y \bigg) \bigg]
$$

### Numerical solution

We consider the numerical solution of the Laplace equation with the same boundary conditions as above on a unit square domain i.e. $a = b = 1$. The analytical solution can be written as follows: 
$$
\phi(x,y) = \sum_{n=0}^{\infin} \frac{4}{(2n+1) \pi  \sinh ({(2n+1) \pi})} \bigg[ \sin ( (2n+1) \pi x )\sinh( (2n+1) \pi y ) \bigg]
$$
The analytical solution is of interest to us as it gives us an exact solution which we can use to compare with the simulation. This is important as often, simulations can give us unexpected or inaccurate results and we need to be sure if what we are evaluating is correct. Broadly, we can use the following strategies for benchmarking and validating our simulations: 

1. Comparison to an analytical solution (What we are doing in this exercise)
2. Comparison to experimental data e.g. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations of real flows which we then go and test experimentally to confirm if we observe the same trends and flow features. 
3. Comparison to previous literature and well studied test cases. Many journal articles that propose new techniques for simulations typically use a series of well studied benchmarking cases that have alot of data available and compare their results to these test cases. 
4. Mesh resolution / convergence study. Instead of comparing the simulation results to other work, a mesh resolution study  where progressively finer meshes can be used in the simulation to evaluate if the results are independent of the mesh resolution. 

Typically, a combination of these techniques will be used in an actual study. 

